---
layout: blog
title: "AIGHT: a Low-effort Productivity Tool"
description: "AIGHT is a command-line tool for getting todo tasks quickly."
date: "2020-02-27"
links:
  - name: AIGHT
    url: https://code.horrific.dev/spb/aight
  - name: dlang.org
    url: https://dlang.org/
categories:
  - blog
---

Recently, I've taken a bit of time off from my Android projects to try out a few
different languages and styles of development, and this one in particular is a
tool that I've co-authored with [Sean Bailey](https://www.spb.li/). Since it's
approaching a semi-stable stage of development, I thought I'd make a short post
to highlight its functionality and our reasons for writing it.

The idea originated from Sean - they often perform an arbitrary action in their
terminal between tasks or when they've run out of ideas: they type the word
`aight`. Of course, this doesn't have any particular use; it just prints "bash:
aight: command not found" on the screen, but it functions as a transition
between different items and tasks that they need to accomplish. Sean had the
idea to write [a bash script](https://code.horrific.dev/spb/aight/src/commit/c6fab72a6019fc1ea2ef0219c793950cf74ab69a/AIGHT.sh)
that would print out their tasks from Trello each time they type this, to
instead show them what they need to do next and hopefully improve their
productivity.

I jumped on board with this pretty easily; I was looking for an excuse to try
out [dlang](https://dlang.org/) in a larger project, and this sounded like a
good excuse to do so - there's a lot of potential functionality to expand upon,
such as displaying different tasks in a different directory, or adding support
for different task or todo-like services. It also gave me the opportunity to
work on something with other people - we are now a group of three people
collaborating on one project. It's incredibly helpful and satisfying to be able
to discuss features and implementation with others, have meaningful code
reviews, and learn from each other as we approach a problem.

![A terminal screen with AIGHT displaying a list of all the annoying bugs I need to fix.](/images/blogs/aight-terminal.png)

## Structure

This might be the first program I've written where I'm still satisfied with the
structure of the program a month after writing it, if that says anything.
However, the actual vocabulary used in the codebase is... confusing, at best.
Most of the core functionality is defined in "providers", which are essentially
different implementations of the functionality for accessing and modifying the
tasks that can be provided by a service. There's one provider implementation for
Trello, one for GitHub issues, one for GitLab, etc...

The program starts by searching through an INI-like
[configuration file](https://code.horrific.dev/spb/aight#user-content-configuration), in
which a "group" (the syntax starting from the provider `[name]` in brackets
until the next empty line) represents a "rule" for a provider, or a particular
situation in which a provider should be used. These rules will be read in order
until the conditions of the rule are met; namely, the current directory and the
current git repo can be set as requirements for a rule to be used. If a rule is
valid, the program will instantiate its provider with the provided parameters in
the rule and perform the action it was started for.

```ini
[trello]
matchRemote=git@github.com:fennifith/*
trelloApiKey=yeet
trelloApiToken=yeet
trelloBoardId=yeet
```

This terminology is not particularly user-friendly and could use some
improvement as the project grows; knowing what someone is referencing when they
say "provider" or "service" or "rule", and that they're all distinct things, is
a bit of an issue for a user that shouldn't need to know about the program's
internal functionality.

## Interface

The simplest interaction with the CLI is simply running `aight` as a command -
using whatever provider is specified in your configuration, it will output a
table or list of the "tasks" it finds. The list also contains an ID number for
each task which can be used to reference it in other commands - for example, to
get more information about task #3: `aight show 3`.

To view a list of the rules in the configuration file (helpful for debugging or
verifying conditions), `aight list-providers` will display all active & inactive
provider rules.

There are also various other commands being planned, such as
[`aight yeet`](https://code.horrific.dev/spb/aight/issues/4) (to mark a task as
"done" / remove it from the list) and
[`aight stonks`](https://code.horrific.dev/spb/aight/issues/19) (to show
statistics about previously closed tasks).

## D Language

D-lang was definitely a good choice for this project - it's almost like a middle
ground between C and NodeJS, where it can interact with system libraries and
functionality at a pretty low level but still have useful tooling and
quality-of-life features similar to node: a package manager for libraries, good
documentation, easy integration with CI & unit testing...

Their website also has a lot of well-written tutorials that make it much easier
to get started with as a newcomer, and there's a good collection of libraries
built for it (along with the existing C/C++ libraries it can bind to).

## "aight install"

Currently, `aight` is only available to install by compiling directly from the
[source code](https://code.horrific.dev/spb/aight) - but we have plans to
distribute it through other package repositories like Homebrew and Arch Linux's
AUR. I'll update this blog when that happens.
